Considering building a pond? Do you have
a lackluster space that needs a little
attention? Or do you just want to add the
soothing flow of water in a high-traffic
area? Incorporating a water feature in
the landscaping is a great way to carve
out a calm, peaceful setting. (Pond Owner) "We've been
looking at pond for quite a while and
wanted a pond with the waterfall. They're
nice and relaxing, and we added the
little flagstone patio to it so that
we'd have a place to sit and just listen
to the water falling in the pond." For
years, ponds have been a favorite project
among outdoor enthusiasts. For
do-it-yourselfers, there are several ways
to bring water into any setting- whether
it is an above-ground pond that requires
no digging, or an in-ground pond that
uses a preformed or flexible liner- the
possibilities are endless. First,
determine how much space is available,
let that determine your water feature. A
small backyard deck would benefit from a
round preformed pond, a narrow walkway
would house a rectangular pond using a
flexible liner. If space is not an issue,
an organically shaped pond with a
multi-tiered waterfall and a stream like
this one is ideal. When choosing the
location for your pond, there are both
practical and aesthetic points to
consider. Ensure the pond is visible from
many areas- whether from a nearby window
or an outdoor living area. (Pond Owner) "I was
very excited to build this pond to spend a
lot of time in the backyard family and
friends. Until now most of our efforts have
been in gardening. We decided we'd build
this pond we chose this area's or our
backyard because it's large enough to
build the pond that we wanted, we could see
it from several points in pur backyard
and the kitchen window." Also consider
many plants, such as water lilies, require
six hours of sunlight a day to produce
blooms. It's best to avoid a location
directly under trees- falling leaves and
matter create debris that can clog
pumps and upset the ponds biological
balance. For safety reasons, choose a
location that doesn't interfere with any
underground power lines or gas pipelines.
Also, check your local building codes or
ordinances related to backyard pools.
Determine the size of the water garden-
use a water hose or spray paint to
outline the design. Keep in mind- the most
common water gardener's regret is that
they did not build the pond large enough.
The base of the pond is generally 1.5
feet deep. In colder climates, dig at
least 2 feet or more to protect fish
against freezing. The base of the pond
can include several ledges at varying
depths to hold rocks and plants for
added interest. Make sure the top edges
of your pond are level create an
elevated 6 to 8 inch ledge around
the perimeter- this will help keep
unwanted water from flowing into the
pond. Remove any rock or debris from the
base and walls of the pond. Underlayment
is needed to protect the liner from
punctures. Sand or carpet remnants
may be used.
Now that you know the size of your pond,
determine the size of the liner and take
into account all added pond ledges and
allow an extra two feet for edging.
Unfold the liner and cover the pond tuck
the liner tightly in all areas and anchor with stones.
To choose a pump, start with a simple
formula: average length times average
width times average depth x 7.5; this is
how many gallons your pump should
circulate. This pond utilizes the smartpond®
UV 1300 gallons per hour Waterfall
Pump. Once the pond liner is covered with
stones, position the pump at the base of
the pond on top of a brick or a flat
stone- this will keep the pump from
sucking in debris at the bottom of the
pond. The corrugated tubing and cord of
the pump should be hidden within a fold
of the liner and run over the edge of
the pond. To ensure maximum cleaning
efficiency, a smartpond® UV Pond Filter
was added to improve the pond's water
quality while promoting the growth of
beneficial bacteria. What does this
really mean? A crystal clear, healthy pond.
This is the perfect time to add lighting-
this cord can also be tucked into a fold
of the liner. Continue by adding large
stones around the edge to anchor the
liner, the liner should extend at least
10 inches past the elevated edge. Trim
and bury the excess liner or cover with
stone or rock. This pond features an impressive
waterfall. The elevation was created with
cinderblocks and excess dirt from the
pond. Corrugated tubing runs
from the pump to the filter and from the
filter to the top of the waterfall. The
waterfall pumpforces water to fall
down multiple levels of slate, meander
the stream, and pass gently into the pond.
To the greatest extent practical,
minimize the number of bends and turns in
the tubing- this will maximize the flow
of water. For more information concerning
pond building, maintenance, and UV
technology, visit www.smart-pond.com.